# rebeccawishnie.github.io
**“Fast Insight About the Severity of Hurricane Impact with Spatial Analysis of Twitter Posts”** (Spasenovic et al, 2019, presented at the FOSS4G 2019)

(https://www.int-arch-photogramm-remote-sens-spatial-inf-sci.net/XLII-4-W14/221/2019/isprs-archives-XLII-4-W14-221-2019.pdf)

	
  Social media provides a new kind of real-time, on-site data on natural disasters and other events, which can then be used as a form of crowdsourced data. This study sought to understand the potential for using georeferenced Tweets to understand the impact of natural disasters, specifically hurricane Michael, as they occur. The study began with the hypothesis that there would be a higher concentration of tweets in areas of high hurricane impact, because people would feel a strong need to share information on the storm and their experiences. This would, in turn, help to reveal a picture of the hurricane’s path. 
	
  To test this, Spasenovic et al. compiled 8169 tweets posted during hurricane Michael (a category 4 hurricane which hit Florida in October of 2018), and later filtered that dataset down to 254 relevant tweets. They used QGIS to perform both Kernel Density and Hot Spot analysis on this refined dataset and overlayed it with data on the path and severity of the hurricane from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). Twitter was chosen as the social media platform from which to retrieve this data because a 2018 study by Spasenovic showed that it is the most popular platform for posting disaster information. It also allows for relatively easy georeferencing, either explicitly (when a tweet includes a geotag based on the GPS information of the device from which it was posted) or implicitly (by using the CIME algorithm, researchers can estimate the location of posting based on where other Twitter users interacted with it through likes, shares, etc.).
	
  Kernel Density analysis shows the density of tweets in an area (100km in this case) surrounding a point feature and, typically, uses heat map coloring to reveal areas of high concentrations of tweets. This analysis identified high concentrations of tweets in Panama City and near Douglas. By overlaying this data with the NOAA’s data regarding the strength and path of the hurricane, they confirmed that Panama City was an area heavily impacted by the storm. The area near Douglas, however, was an unpopulated agricultural area outside of the main path of the storm, so the researchers questioned the accuracy of the CIME location data. These findings and interpretations were confirmed by the Hot Spot analysis, which took into account the temporal nature of the storm by color coding spatially clustered tweets by time: blue circles showed tweets from the beginning of the storm, and orange circles showed tweets from the end of the storm. This analysis showed clusters of tweets in places of high impact, such as Panama City, and eliminated the cluster outside of Douglas because the tweets were not posted at a similar time during storm.
	
  Spasenovic et al. concluded that Twitter is an important site of data for quickly understanding the impact of a natural disaster, because real-time data clusters in areas of high impact and Hot Spot analysis can help reveal a picture of both the spatial and temporal nature of the storm and its impact. The fact that tweets are essentially crowdsourced data corresponds well with the use of open source GIS technology: both demonstrate the potential of open, collaborative technology, especially on events and projects that impact a wide variety of people and places.
